R Assignment 3: Species Delimitation using Morphometrics and Machine
Learning
================

<br> <br>

#### Motivation

Add section…

-----

<br> <br>

#### Prerequisites

Before starting this week’s tutorial you will have: <br>

1.  downloaded the program
    [Image\_J](https://imagej.nih.gov/ij/download.htm) for making
    morphometric measurements, <br>

2.  downloaded the class google sheet in the file format .csv. Note: if
    you can’t use imageJ for any reason, don’t panic. Display the
    digital image of the herbarium sheet on any device and use a ruler
    held up to the screen to make measurements, <br>

3.  **MB**: probably need to get students to do some pre-assignment
    reading on machine learning (decision trees, random forests). Also,
    some reading on MDS and interpreting MDS plots.

-----

<br> <br>

#### Outcomes

By the end of this tutorial you will: <br>

1.  have experience taking morphometric measurements from herbarium
    specimens, <br>

2.  understand some core concepts in machine learning and how it can be
    used in species delimitation, <br>

3.  the tools and knowledge needed to implement machine learning in R as
    part of a taxonomic research programme, <br>

4.  More?

-----

<br> <br>

#### Activity 1: Taking Morphometrics Measurements from Herbarium Specimens using ImageJ

ImageJ is an image processing software that was developed by the NIH. It
is used to analyze different types of images but this tutorial will
cover how to measure certain morphological features from photographs of
herbarium specimens. <br>

To use ImageJ you have to import the photographs you want to work with.
<br>

1.  Drag the file to the lower grey bar. As you are doing this the words
    \<<drag and drop>\> should appear. Once the image has been dropped
    it will open and now it is ready to analyze in ImageJ. <br>

There are many measurements that can be taken with ImageJ. It might be
helpful to click through the different buttons at the top of the bar to
explore all of the different ways ImageJ can make measurements. This
tutorial will use the line button for all of the measurements. <br>

2.  Zoom in on the ruler (Mac: Command shift =, Windows: CTRL + ). Most
    digitized herbarium specimens will have a ruler in the photograph.
    This is to help standardized it and is useful for measuring features
    in ImageJ. <br>

3.  Use the line button (5th button from the left) and draw a line by
    clicking and dragging along the bottom of the ruler so that the line
    goes from the 0 tick to the 5 cm tick. This needs to be very
    accurate because we are going to use this length to calibrate the
    rest of the measurements taken in ImageJ. <br>

4.  Go to the top bar and hit “analyze”. Then go to “set scale…”. Enter
    5 into the Known distance box and enter cm into the Unit of Length
    box. Hit the box “Global”. By checking “Global” you are ensuring
    that this is applied to all photos in the current session of ImageJ.
    Then hit OK. ImageJ is now calibrated using the ruler from your
    herbarium photo. <br>

Now you can go on to take measurements. <br>

5.  Use the line or the segmented line (you can change between them by
    right clicking on the line button) draw lines across what you want
    to measure. Once you have the right length hit (Mac: Command M,
    Windows: CTRL M) and ImageJ will measure and record the length in a
    convenient table for you. This table should pop up once you take
    your first measurement. When you have all of the measurements you
    need you can either download that table that ImageJ made or just
    copy and input the data in your own table. You will have to
    eventually input your data in a group google sheet so keep that in
    mind as you are recording data. <br>

6.  Once you have taken and recorded all of the measurements necessary
    put your findings into the class google spreadsheet so that other
    people will be able to access, download, and use your data for the
    next step. <br>

Note: [Here is a
link](https://imagej.nih.gov/ij/docs/guide/user-guide.pdf) to the ImageJ
user guide. All the information you will need is in this document, but
if you are interested in the program and the other features available,
the user guide can provide more information.

-----

<br> <br>

#### Activity 2: Delimiting Species using Morphometrics and Machine Learning

`randomForest` is an R package that uses machine learning for
classification, regression, and clustering. It combines the simplicity
of decision trees with flexibility which makes the result more accurate
than simply using decision trees alone. There are many tutorials and
videos online about `randomForest` but [this
video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J4Wdy0Wc_xQ) is useful if you
want more background.

**MB**: maybe this video (or other online learning resources) should be
a ‘pre-assignment’?

<br>

There are a few ways to use `randomForest` but this tutorial will cover
using the package in unsupervised mode. This means that the program will
have to find the structure of the data itself, without us training it
first.

<br>

1.  Open R and set your working directory. You want the working
    directory to be wherever the data set you are going to input is
    located.

2.  Install the packages needed for `randomForest` to run properly.
    These are `randomForest`, `tidyverse`, and `caret`. Installation
    only needs to be done once so if you have already downloaded any of
    these (`install.packages()`), attach the packages using `library()`.

3.  By highlighting the script from lines 11-91 and pressing
    **Ctrl+Enter** (or clicking **Run** at the top of the Source Pane),
    the functions will execute consecutively, storing objects in the
    **Environment Pane**.

**MB**: Might need some additional instruction and R code to help with
importing the morphometric data. If this tutorial is done on RStudio
Cloud, we can load the data in automatically when they open the
assignment.

-----

<br> <br>

#### Activity 3: Deciphering some code

Let’s step through the R script in order to understand what is happening
here.

<br>

**Lines 12-15**: The `library()` function loads various packages
designed specifically for machine learning (`caret`, `randomForest`),
and filtering and plotting data (`tidyverse`).

**Line 23**: Set the seed for the random number generator. This can be
any number.

**MB**: might need to explain the signficance of this step.

**Lines 33-42**: The `randomForest()` function generates 30000 decision
trees (`ntree`) that attempt to classify the specimens based on binary
questions posed to the morphometrics data (`columbine_data`). Each
question (‘node’) in the decision tree consideres three morphometric
variables (`mtry`). Setting `proximity = TRUE` tells the function to
calculate a similarity metric between specimens. This will come in handy
in the following step.

**Line 51**: Create a distance matrix to describing how similar or
dissimilar each sample is from one another.

**Line 54**: The `cmdscale()` function finds the axes of greatest
variation in our morphometrics dataset. For example, if corolla width
was the trait that varied the most between all specimens, `cmdscale()`
would assign this variable as *MDS axis 1*. In reality, it’s unlikely
that a single trait will explain the greatest variation in morphology,
instead, MDS axes tend to be combinations of traits.

**MB**: maybe this should be part of pre-assignment reading?

**Lines 57-64**: At this part of the script we will extract information
from our MDS object `mds.analysis` and store this information into
various objects. These objects help us to choose which information is
most useful to us, and make it easier to create our MDS plot later on.

**Line 57**: Let’s extract the percentage variation described by each of
*MDS axis 1* and *MDS axis 2*. Recall from previous tutorials that the
`$` operator is a way to subset data (in this case `mds.analysis`) in
order to extract information. We’ll round the percent variation to the
nearest tenth using `round()`.

**Line 59**: Here, we’re using the `$` operator to extract information
about where each specimen lies in the morphometric ‘shape space’.

**Lines 61-64**: We’ll create our own spreadsheet of data for plotting
using the `data.frame()` function. Each parameter in this function
specifies a column in the spreadsheet (`data.frame`).

**Lines 62-94**: The `ggplot()` function takes our `mds.data` object and
plots it. *MDS1* is the axis explaining the most morphometric variation
in our herbarium dataset. Notice that this axis separates *A.
flavescens* and *A. formosa*.

**MB**: Opportunity here to pose some questions about the ‘V’
distribution of specimens in the MDS plot.

**The result**:

![Figure 1: MDS plot depicting morphometric variation in two species of
*Aquilegia*.](aquelgia_mds.jpg) <br> <br>
